--- Page 1 ---
An Impossibility Theorem for Clustering
Jon Kleinberg
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca NY 14853
Abstract
Although the study of clustering is centered around an intuitively
compelling goal, it has been very di(cid:14)cult to develop a uni(cid:12)ed
framework for reasoning about it at a technical level, and pro-
foundly diverse approaches to clustering abound in the research
community. Here we suggest a formal perspective on the di(cid:14)culty
in (cid:12)nding such a uni(cid:12)cation, in the form of an impossibility theo-
rem: for a set of three simple properties, we show that there is no
clustering function satisfying all three. Relaxations of these prop-
erties expose some of the interesting (and unavoidable) trade-o(cid:11)s
atworkinwell-studiedclusteringtechniquessuchassingle-linkage,
sum-of-pairs, k-means, and k-median.
1 Introduction
Clustering is a notion that arisesnaturally in many (cid:12)elds; wheneverone has a het-
erogeneousset of objects, it is natural to seek methods for groupingthem together
based on an underlying measure of similarity. A standard approach is to represent
the collection of objectsas aset of abstractpoints, and de(cid:12)ne distances among the
points to represent similarities | the closer the points, the more similar they are.
Thus, clustering is centered around an intuitively compelling but vaguely de(cid:12)ned
goal: givenanunderlyingsetofpoints,partitionthemintoacollectionofclustersso
that points in the same cluster are close together, while points in di(cid:11)erent clusters
are far apart.
Thestudyofclusteringisuni(cid:12)edonlyatthisverygenerallevelofdescription,how-
ever; at the level of concretemethods and algorithms,one quicklyencountersa be-
wilderingarrayofdi(cid:11)erentclusteringtechniques,includingagglomerative,spectral,
information-theoretic,and centroid-based,aswell asthose arisingfromcombinato-
rial optimization and from probabilistic generative models. These techniques are
basedondiverseunderlyingprinciples,andtheyoftenleadtoqualitativelydi(cid:11)erent
results. Anumberof standardtextbooks[1,4,6,9]provideoverviewsof arangeof
the approachesthat are generally employed.
Giventhescopeoftheissue,therehasbeenrelativelylittleworkaimedatreasoning
about clustering independently of any particular algorithm, objective function, or
generative data model. But it is not clear that this needs to be the case. To take
a motivatingexample from atechnically di(cid:11)erent but methodologicallysimilarset-
--- Page 2 ---
ting, researchin mathematical economics has frequently formalized broad intuitive
notions(howtofairlydivideresources,orhowtoachieveconsensusfromindividual
preferences) in what is often termed an axiomatic framework | one enumerates a
collectionofsimplepropertiesthatasolutionoughttosatisfy,andthenstudieshow
these properties constrain the solutions one is able to obtain [10]. In some striking
cases, as in Arrow’s celebrated theorem on social choice functions [2], the result is
impossibility | there is no solution that simultaneously satis(cid:12)es a small collection
of simple properties.
In this paper, we develop an axiomatic framework for clustering. First, as is stan-
dard, we de(cid:12)ne a clustering function to be any function f that takes a set S of n
points with pairwise distances between them, and returns a partition of S. (The
pointsin S arenotassumedtobelong toanyambientspace; the pairwise distances
are the only data one has about them.) We then consider the e(cid:11)ect of requir-
ing the clustering function to obey certain natural properties. Our (cid:12)rst result is
a basic impossibility theorem: for a set of three simple properties | essentially
scale-invariance, a richness requirement that all partitions be achievable, and a
consistency condition on the shrinkingand stretchingof individual distances | we
show that there is no clustering function satisfying all three. None of these prop-
erties is redundant, in the sense that it is easy to construct clustering functions
satisfying any two of the three. We also show, by way of contrast, that certain
natural relaxations of this set of properties are satis(cid:12)ed by versions of well-known
clustering functions, including those derived from single-linkage and sum-of-pairs.
Inparticular,wefullycharacterizethesetofpossibleoutputsofaclusteringfunction
that satis(cid:12)es the scale-invarianceand consistency properties.
How should one interpret an impossibility result in this setting? The fact that it
arises directly from three simple constraints suggests a technical underpinning for
the di(cid:14)culty in unifying the initial, informal concept of \clustering." It indicates a
set of basic trade-o(cid:11)s that are inherent in the clustering problem, and o(cid:11)ers a way
todistinguishbetweenclusteringmethodsbasednotsimplyonoperationalgrounds,
but on the ways in which they resolve the choices implicit in these trade-o(cid:11)s. Ex-
ploring relaxations of the properties helps to sharpen this type of analysis further
|providingaperspective,forexample,onthe distinctionbetweenclusteringfunc-
tions that (cid:12)x the number of clusters a priori and those that do not; and between
clusteringfunctionsthatbuildinafundamentallengthscaleandthosethatdonot.
Other Axiomatic Approaches. As discussed above, the vast majority of ap-
proaches to clustering are derived from the application of speci(cid:12)c algorithms, the
optima of speci(cid:12)c objective functions, or the consequences of particularprobabilis-
tic generativemodels for the data. Here we brie(cid:13)y review workseekingto examine
properties that do not overtly impose a particular objective function or model.
Jardine and Sibson [7] and Puzicha, Hofmann, and Buhmann [12] have considered
axiomatic approaches to clustering, although they operate in formalisms quite dif-
ferentfromours,andtheydonotseekimpossibilityresults. JardineandSibsonare
concerned with hierarchical clustering, where one constructs a tree of nested clus-
ters. They show that a hierarchical version of single-linkage is the unique function
consistent with a collection of properties; however, this is primarily a consequence
of the fact that one of their properties is an implicit optimization criterion that
is uniquely optimized by single-linkage. Puzicha et al. consider properties of cost
functionsonpartitions;theseimplicitlyde(cid:12)neclusteringfunctionsthroughthepro-
cess of choosing a minimum-cost partition. They investigate a particular class of
clustering functions that arises if one requires the cost function to decompose into
a certain additive form. Recently, Kalai, Papadimitriou, Vempala, and Vetta have
--- Page 3 ---
alsoinvestigatedanaxiomaticframeworkforclustering[8];liketheapproachofJar-
dine and Sibson [7], and in contrast to our work here, they formulate a collection
of propertiesthat aresu(cid:14)cient to uniquely specify aparticularclusteringfunction.
Axiomatic approaches have also been applied in areas related to clustering | par-
ticularlyincollaborative(cid:12)ltering,whichharnessessimilaritiesamonguserstomake
recommendations, and in discrete location theory, which focuses on the placement
of\central"facilitiesamongdistributedcollectionsofindividuals. Forcollaborative
(cid:12)ltering, Pennock et al. [11] show how results from social choice theory, including
versionsofArrow’sImpossibilityTheorem[2],canbeappliedtocharacterizerecom-
mendation systems satisfying collections of simple properties. In discrete location
theory, Hansen and Roberts [5] prove an impossibility result for choosing a central
facilitytoserveasetofdemandsonagraph;essentially,givenacertaincollectionof
requiredproperties,theyshowthat anyfunction thatspeci(cid:12)esthe resultingfacility
must be highly sensitive to small changes in the input.
2 The Impossibility Theorem
AclusteringfunctionoperatesonasetS ofn(cid:21)2pointsandthepairwisedistances
among them. Since we wish to deal with point sets that do not necessarily belong
toanambientspace, weidentify the points with the set S =f1;2;:::;ng. We then
de(cid:12)ne a distance function to be any function d :S(cid:2)S !R such that for distinct
i;j 2S,wehaved(i;j)(cid:21)0,d(i;j)=0ifandonlyifi=j,andd(i;j)=d(j;i). One
canoptionallyrestrictattentionto distancefunctions that aremetrics byimposing
the triangle inequality: d(i;k) (cid:20) d(i;j)+d(j;k) for all i;j;k 2 S. We will not
require the triangle inequality in the discussion here, but the results to follow |
both negative and positive | still hold if one does require it.
A clustering function is a function f that takes a distance function d on S and
returnsapartition(cid:0)ofS. Thesetsin(cid:0)willbecalleditsclusters. Wenotethat,as
written, a clustering function is de(cid:12)ned only on point sets of a particular size (n);
however,all the speci(cid:12)c clusteringfunctions weconsiderherewill be de(cid:12)ned forall
values of n larger than some small base value.
Here is a (cid:12)rst property one could require of a clustering function. If d is a distance
function,wewrite(cid:11)(cid:1)dtodenotethedistancefunctioninwhichthedistancebetween
i and j is (cid:11)d(i;j).
Scale-Invariance. For any distance function d and any (cid:11) > 0,
we have f(d)=f((cid:11)(cid:1)d).
This is simply the requirement that the clustering function not be sensitive to
changesintheunitsofdistancemeasurement|itshouldnothaveabuilt-in\length
scale." A second property is that the output of the clustering function should be
\rich" | every partition of S is a possible output. To state this more compactly,
letRange(f)denotethe setofallpartitions(cid:0)suchthatf(d)=(cid:0)forsomedistance
function d.
Richness. Range(f) is equal to the set of all partitions of S.
In other words, suppose we are given the names of the points only (i.e. the indices
in S) but not the distances between them. Richness requires that for any desired
partition (cid:0), it should be possible to construct a distance function d on S for which
f(d)=(cid:0).
--- Page 4 ---
Finally, we discuss a Consistency property that is more subtle that the (cid:12)rst two.
We think of a clustering function as being \consistent" if it exhibits the following
behavior: when we shrink distances between points inside a cluster and expand
distances between pointsin di(cid:11)erent clusters, wegetthe sameresult. Tomakethis
precise, we introduce the following de(cid:12)nition. Let (cid:0) be a partition of S, and d and
d0 two distance functions on S. We say that d0 is a (cid:0)-transformation of d if (a) for
all i;j 2S belongingto the same cluster of (cid:0), we haved0(i;j)(cid:20)d(i;j); and (b) for
all i;j 2S belonging to di(cid:11)erent clusters of (cid:0), we have d0(i;j)(cid:21)d(i;j).
Consistency. Letdandd0 betwodistancefunctions. Iff(d)=(cid:0),
and d0 is a (cid:0)-transformation of d, then f(d0)=(cid:0).
Inotherwords,supposethatthe clustering(cid:0)arisesfromthe distancefunctiond. If
wenowproduced0 byreducingdistances withinthe clustersandenlargingdistance
between the clusters then the same clustering (cid:0) should arise from d0.
We can now state the impossibility theorem very simply.
Theorem 2.1 Foreach n(cid:21)2,thereisnoclusteringfunctionf thatsatis(cid:12)esScale-
Invariance, Richness, and Consistency.
We will prove Theorem 2.1 in the next section, as a consequence of a more general
statement. Before doing this, we re(cid:13)ect on the relation of these properties to one
another by showing that there exist natural clustering functions satisfying any two
of the three properties.
To do this, we describe the single-linkage procedure (see e.g. [6]), which in fact de-
(cid:12)nes a family of clustering functions. Intuitively, single-linkage operates by initial-
izingeachpointasitsowncluster,andthen repeatedlymergingthepairof clusters
whose distance to one another (as measured from their closest points of approach)
is minimum. More concretely, single-linkage constructs a weighted complete graph
G whose node set is S and for which the weight on edge (i;j) is d(i;j). It then
d
orders the edges of G by non-decreasing weight (breaking ties lexicographically),
d
and adds edges one at a time until a speci(cid:12)ed stopping condition is reached. Let
H denote the subgraph consisting of all edges that are added before the stopping
d
condition is reached; the connected components of H are the clusters.
d
Thus,bychoosingastoppingconditionforthesingle-linkageprocedure,oneobtains
aclusteringfunction,whichmapstheinputdistancefunctiontothesetofconnected
components that results at the end of the procedure. We now show that for any
twoofthethreepropertiesinTheorem2.1,onecanchooseasingle-linkagestopping
condition so that the resulting clustering function satis(cid:12)es these two properties.
Here are the three types of stopping conditions we will consider.
(cid:15) k-cluster stopping condition. Stop adding edges when the subgraph (cid:12)rst
consists of k connected components. (We will only consider this condition
to be well-de(cid:12)ned when the number of points is at least k.)
(cid:15) distance-r stopping condition. Only add edges of weight at most r.
(cid:15) scale-(cid:11) stopping condition. Let (cid:26)(cid:3) denote the maximum pairwise distance;
i.e. (cid:26)(cid:3) =max d(i;j). Only add edges of weight at most (cid:11)(cid:26)(cid:3).
i;j
It is clear that these various stopping conditions qualitatively trade o(cid:11) certain of
the propertiesin Theorem2.1. Thus, for example, the k-cluster stoppingcondition
does not attempt to produce all possible partitions, while the distance-r stopping
condition builds in a fundamental length scale, and hence is not scale-invariant.
--- Page 5 ---
However, by the appropriate choice of one of these stopping conditions, one can
achieve any two of the three properties in Theorem 2.1.
Theorem 2.2 (a) For any k (cid:21)1, and any n(cid:21)k, single-linkage with the k-cluster
stopping condition satis(cid:12)es Scale-Invariance and Consistency.
(b) For any positive (cid:11)<1, and any n(cid:21)3, single-linkage with the scale-(cid:11) stopping
condition satis(cid:12)es Scale-Invariance and Richness.
(c) For any r > 0, and any n (cid:21) 2, single-linkage with the distance-r stopping
condition satis(cid:12)es Richness and Consistency.
3 Antichains of Partitions
We now state and prove a strengthening of the impossibility result. We say that
a partition (cid:0)0 is a re(cid:12)nement of a partition (cid:0) if for every set C0 2 (cid:0)0, there is a
set C 2 (cid:0) such that C0 (cid:18) C. We de(cid:12)ne a partial order on the set of all partitions
by writing (cid:0)0 (cid:22)(cid:0) if (cid:0)0 is a re(cid:12)nement of (cid:0). Following the terminology of partially
ordered sets, we say that a collection of partitions is an antichain if it does not
contain two distinct partitions such that one is a re(cid:12)nement of the other.
Forasetof n(cid:21)2points,the collectionofallpartitionsdoesnotformanantichain;
thus, Theorem 2.1 follows from
Theorem 3.1 Ifaclusteringfunctionf satis(cid:12)esScale-InvarianceandConsistency,
then Range(f) is an antichain.
Proof. For a partition (cid:0), we say that a distance function d (a;b)-conforms to (cid:0) if,
for all pairs of points i;j that belong to the same cluster of (cid:0), we have d(i;j)(cid:20)a,
whileforallpairsof pointsi;j that belong todi(cid:11)erentclusters,wehaved(i;j)(cid:21)b.
With respect to a given clustering function f, we say that a pair of positive real
numbers (a;b) is (cid:0)-forcing if, for all distance functions d that (a;b)-conform to (cid:0),
we have f(d)=(cid:0).
Let f be a clustering function that satis(cid:12)es Consistency. We claim that for any
partition (cid:0)2Range(f), there exist positive real numbers a<b such that the pair
(a;b) is (cid:0)-forcing. To see this, we (cid:12)rst note that since (cid:0)2Range(f), there exists a
distancefunctiondsuchthatf(d)=(cid:0). Now,leta0 betheminimumdistanceamong
pairsof pointsin the sameclusterof (cid:0), andlet b0 be the maximumdistanceamong
pairs of points that do not belong to the same cluster of (cid:0). Choose numbers a<b
so that a (cid:20)a0 and b (cid:21) b0. Clearly any distance function d0 that (a;b)-conforms to
(cid:0) must be a (cid:0)-transformationof d, and so by the Consistency property, f(d0)=(cid:0).
It follows that the pair (a;b) is (cid:0)-forcing.
Now suppose further that the clustering function f satis(cid:12)es Scale-Invariance, and
that there exist distinct partitions (cid:0) ;(cid:0) 2 Range(f) such that (cid:0) is a re(cid:12)nement
0 1 0
of (cid:0) . We show how this leads to a contradiction.
1
Let(a ;b ) bea(cid:0) -forcingpair,andlet(a ;b )be a(cid:0) -forcingpair,wherea <b
0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0
anda <b ;theexistenceofsuchpairsfollowsfromourclaimabove. Leta beany
1 1 2
number less than or equal to a , and choose " so that 0 < " < a a b(cid:0)1. It is now
1 0 2 0
straightforward to construct a distance function d with the following properties:
Forpairsofpointsi;j thatbelongtothe sameclusterof(cid:0) ,wehaved(i;j)(cid:20)"; for
0
pairs i;j that belong to the same cluster of (cid:0) but not to the same cluster of (cid:0) ,
1 0
we have a (cid:20) d(i;j) (cid:20) a ; and for pairs i;j the do not belong to the same cluster
2 1
of (cid:0) , we have d(i;j)(cid:21)b .
1 1
--- Page 6 ---
Thedistancefunctiond(a ;b )-conformsto(cid:0) ,andsowehavef(d)=(cid:0) . Nowset
1 1 1 1
(cid:11)=b a(cid:0)1,andde(cid:12)ned0 =(cid:11)(cid:1)d. ByScale-Invariance,wemusthavef(d0)=f(d)=
0 2
(cid:0) . But for points i;j in the same cluster of (cid:0) we have d0(i;j) (cid:20) "b a(cid:0)1 < a ,
1 0 0 2 0
while for points i;j that do not belong to the same cluster of (cid:0) we have d0(i;j)(cid:21)
0
a b a(cid:0)1 (cid:21)b . Thusd0 (a ;b )-conformsto(cid:0) , andsowemust havef(d0)=(cid:0) . As
2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0
(cid:0) 6=(cid:0) , this is a contradiction.
0 1
The proof above uses our assumption that the clustering function f is de(cid:12)ned on
the set of all distance functions on n points. However, essentially the same proof
yieldsacorrespondingimpossibilityresultforclusteringfunctionsf thatarede(cid:12)ned
only on metrics, or only on distance functions arising from n points in a Euclidean
space of some dimension. To adapt the proof, one need only be careful to choose
the constant a and distance function d to satisfy the required properties.
2
We now prove a complementary positive result; together with Theorem 3.1, this
completely characterizes the possible values of Range(f) for clustering functions f
that satisfy Scale-Invarianceand Consistency.
Theorem 3.2 For every antichain of partitions A, there is a clustering function f
satisfying Scale-Invariance and Consistency for which Range(f)=A.
Proof. Given an arbitrary antichain A, it is not clear how to produce a stopping
condition for the single-linkage procedure that gives rise to a clustering function f
with Range(f)=A. (Note that the k-clusterstoppingcondition yieldsaclustering
function whoserangeisthe antichainconsistingof allpartitionsintok sets.) Thus,
to prove this result, we use a variant of the sum-of-pairs clustering function (see
e.g. [3]), adapted to general antichains. We focus on the case in which jAj > 1,
since the case of jAj=1 is trivial.
Forapartition(cid:0)2A,wewrite(i;j)(cid:24)(cid:0)ifbothiandjbelongtothesameclusterin
(cid:0). TheA-sum-of-pairsfunctionf seeksthepartition(cid:0)2Athatminimizesthesum
of all distances between pairs of points in the same cluster; in other words, it seeks
the (cid:0) 2 A minimizing the objective function (cid:8) ((cid:0))= d(i;j): (Ties are
d P(i;j)(cid:24)(cid:0)
brokenlexicographically.) It iscrucialthat the minimizationisonlyoverpartitions
in A; clearly, if we wished to minimize this objective function over all partitions,
we would choose the partition in which each point forms its own cluster.
Itisclearthatf satis(cid:12)esScale-Invariance,since(cid:8) (cid:11)(cid:1)d((cid:0))=(cid:11)(cid:8) d((cid:0))foranypartition
(cid:0). By de(cid:12)nition we have Range(f) (cid:18) A, and we argue that Range(f) (cid:19) A as
follows. Foranypartition(cid:0)2A, constructadistancefunctiondwith thefollowing
properties: d(i;j) <n(cid:0)3 for every pair of points i;j belonging to the same cluster
of (cid:0), and d(i;j) (cid:21) 1 for every pair of points i;j belonging to di(cid:11)erent clusters of
(cid:0). We have (cid:8) ((cid:0)) < 1; and moreover (cid:8) ((cid:0)0) < 1 only for partitions (cid:0)0 that are
d d
re(cid:12)nements of (cid:0). Since A is an antichain, it follows that (cid:0) must minimize (cid:8) over
d
all partitions in A, and hence f(d)=(cid:0).
It remains only to verify Consistency. Suppose that for the distance function d,
we have f(d) = (cid:0); and let d0 be a (cid:0)-transformation of d. For any partition (cid:0)0, let
(cid:1)((cid:0)0) = (cid:8) d((cid:0)0)(cid:0)(cid:8) d0((cid:0)0): It is enough to show that for any partition (cid:0)0 2 A, we
have (cid:1)((cid:0))(cid:21)(cid:1)((cid:0)0):
But this follows simply because (cid:1)((cid:0))= d(i;j)(cid:0)d0(i;j); while
P(i;j)(cid:24)(cid:0)
(cid:1)((cid:0)0 )= X d(i;j)(cid:0)d0 (i;j)(cid:20) X d(i;j)(cid:0)d0 (i;j)(cid:20)(cid:1)((cid:0));
(i;j)(cid:24)(cid:0)0 (i;j)(cid:24)(cid:0)0 and (i;j)(cid:24)(cid:0)
where both inequalities follow because d0 is a (cid:0)-transformation of d: (cid:12)rst, only
--- Page 7 ---
termscorrespondingtopairsinthe sameclusterof(cid:0)arenon-negative;andsecond,
every term corresponding to a pair in the same cluster of (cid:0) is non-negative.
4 Centroid-Based Clustering and Consistency
Inawidely-usedapproachtoclustering,oneselectskoftheinputpointsascentroids,
and then de(cid:12)nes clusters by assigning each point in S to its nearest centroid. The
goal,intuitively,istochoosethecentroidssothateachpointinS isclosetoatleast
one of them. This overall approach arises both from combinatorial optimization
perspectives, where it has roots in facility location problems [9], and in maximum-
likelihoodmethods,wherethecentroidsmayrepresentcentersofprobabilitydensity
functions [4, 6]. We show here that for a fairly general class of centroid-based
clustering functions, including k-means and k-median, none of the functions in the
classsatis(cid:12)estheConsistencyproperty. Thissuggestsaninterestingtensionbetween
between Consistency and the centroid-based approach to clustering, and forms a
contrast with the results for single-linkage and sum-of-pairs in previous sections.
Speci(cid:12)cally, for any natural number k (cid:21) 2, and any continuous, non-decreasing,
and unbounded function g : R+ ! R+, we de(cid:12)ne the (k;g)-centroid clustering
function as follows. First, we choose the set of k \centroid" points T (cid:18) S for
whichtheobjectivefunction(cid:3)g(T)= g(d(i;T))isminimized. (Hered(i;T)=
d Pi2S
min j2T d(i;j).) Then we de(cid:12)ne a partition of S into k clusters by assigning each
point to the element of T closest to it. The k-median function [9] is obtained
by setting g to be the identity function, while the objective function underlying
k-means clustering [4, 6] is obtained by setting g(d)=d2.
Theorem 4.1 For every k (cid:21) 2 and every function g chosen as above, and for n
su(cid:14)cientlylarge relative tok, the(k;g)-centroidclusteringfunctiondoes not satisfy
the Consistency property.
Proof Sketch. We describe the proof for k =2 clusters; the case of k >2 is similar.
We consider a set of points S that is divided into two subsets: a set X consisting
of m points, and a set Y consisting of (cid:13)m points, for a small number (cid:13) > 0. The
distance between points in X is r, the distance between points in Y is " < r, and
the distance from a point in X to a point in Y is r+(cid:14), for a small number (cid:14) >0.
By choosing (cid:13), r, ", and (cid:14) appropriately, the optimal choice of k = 2 centroids
will consist of one point from X and one from Y, and the resulting partition (cid:0) will
have clusters X and Y. Now, suppose we divide X into sets X and X of equal
0 1
size, and reduce the distances between points in the same X to be r0 <r (keeping
i
all other distances the same). This can be done, for r0 small enough, so that the
optimalchoiceof twocentroidswillnowconsistof onepointfromeachX ,yielding
i
a di(cid:11)erent partition of S. As our second distance function is a (cid:0)-transformationof
the (cid:12)rst, this violates Consistency.
5 Relaxing the Properties
Inadditiontolookingforclusteringfunctionsthatsatisfysubsetsofthebasicprop-
erties, we can also study the e(cid:11)ect of relaxing the properties themselves. Theo-
rem 3.2 is a step in this direction, showing that the sum-of-pairs function satis(cid:12)es
Scale-Invariance and Consistency, together with a relaxation of the Richness prop-
erty. As an another example, it is interesting to note that single-linkage with the
distance-r stopping condition satis(cid:12)es a natural relaxation of Scale-Invariance: if
(cid:11)>1, then f((cid:11)(cid:1)d) is a re(cid:12)nement of f(d).
--- Page 8 ---
We now consider some relaxations of Consistency. Let f be a clustering function,
anddadistancefunctionsuchthatf(d)=(cid:0). Ifwereducedistanceswithinclusters
andexpanddistancesbetweenclusters,Consistencyrequiresthatf outputthesame
partition (cid:0). But one could imagine requiring something less: perhaps changing
distances this way should be allowed to create additional sub-structure, leading to
anewpartitioninwhicheachclusterisasubsetofoneoftheoriginalclusters. Thus,
we can de(cid:12)ne Re(cid:12)nement-Consistency, a relaxation of Consistency, to require that
if d0 is an f(d)-transformation of d, then f(d0) should be a re(cid:12)nement of f(d).
WecanshowthatthenaturalanalogueofTheorem2.1stillholds: thereisnocluster-
ing function that satis(cid:12)es Scale-Invariance, Richness, and Re(cid:12)nement-Consistency.
However, there is a crucial sense in which this result \just barely" holds, render-
ing it arguably less interesting to us here. Speci(cid:12)cally, let (cid:0)(cid:3) denote the par-
n
tition of S = f1;2;:::;ng in which each individual element forms its own clus-
ter. Then there exist clustering functions f that satisfy Scale-Invariance and
Re(cid:12)nement-Consistency, and for which Range(f) consists of all partitions except
(cid:0)(cid:3). (Oneexampleissingle-linkagewiththedistance-((cid:11)(cid:14))stoppingcondition,where
n
(cid:14) = min d(i;j) is the minimum inter-point distance, and (cid:11) (cid:21) 1.) Such func-
i;j
tions f, in addition to Scale-Invariance and Re(cid:12)nement-Consistency, thus satisfy a
kind of Near-Richness property: one can obtain every partition as output except
for a single, trivial partition. It is in this sense that our impossibility result for
Re(cid:12)nement-Consistency, unlike Theorem 2.1, is quite \brittle."
To relax Consistency even further, we could say simply that if d0 is an f(d)-
transformation of d, then one of f(d) or f(d0) should be a re(cid:12)nement of the other.
In other words, f(d0) may be either a re(cid:12)nement or a \coarsening" of f(d). It is
possible to construct clustering functions f that satisfy this even weakervariant of
Consistency, together with Scale-Invarianceand Richness.
Acknowledgements. IthankShaiBen-David,JohnHopcroft,andLillianLeefor
valuable discussions on this topic. This researchwas supported in part by a David
and Lucile PackardFoundation Fellowship,an ONR YoungInvestigatorAward,an
NSF Faculty Early Career Development Award, and NSF ITR Grant IIS-0081334.
References
[1] M. Anderberg, Cluster Analysis for Applications, Academic Press, 1973.
[2] K.Arrow, Social Choice and Individual Values, Wiley, New York,1951.
[3] M.Bern,D.Eppstein,\Approximationalgorithmsforgeometricprolems,"inApproxi-
mationAlgorithmsforNP-HardProblems,(D.Hochbaum,Ed.),PWSPublishing,1996.
[4] R.Duda,P. Hart, D. Stork,Pattern Classi(cid:12)cation (2ndedition), Wiley, 2001.
[5] P.Hansen,F. Roberts,\Animpossibility result inaxiomatic location theory," Mathe-
matics of Operations Research 21(1996).
[6] A.Jain, R.Dubes, Algorithms for Clustering Data, Prentice-Hall, 1981.
[7] N.Jardine, R.Sibson, Mathematical Taxonomy Wiley, 1971.
[8] A.Kalai,C.Papadimitriou,S.Vempala,A.Vetta,personalcommunication,June2002.
[9] P.Mirchandani, R.Francis, Discrete Location Theory, Wiley, 1990.
[10] M. Osborne A.Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, MIT Press, 1994.
[11] D.Pennock,E.Horvitz,C.L.Giles, \Social choicetheoryandrecommendersystems:
Analysisoftheaxiomaticfoundationsofcollaborative(cid:12)ltering,"Proc.17thAAAI,2000.
[12] J. Puzicha, T. Hofmann, J. Buhmann \A Theory of Proximity Based Clustering:
StructureDetection byOptimization," Pattern Recognition, 33(2000).